README.md, before:

# Mantis — Personal AI Runtime

<p align="center">
  <img src="docs/assets/mantis-logo.png" alt="Mantis Logo" width="420"/>
</p>

<p align="center">
  <strong>AUTOMATE • THINK • EXECUTE</strong>
</p>

---

**Mantis** is a minimal, extensible personal AI runtime for autonomous task execution using **OpenAI, Claude, or local LLMs** with vector memory and tool orchestration.

Bring your own model. Run your own agent. Own your AI stack.

---

## Features

* OpenAI-compatible API
* Works with **OpenAI, Claude, or Local LLMs**
* Autonomous agent loop
* Planner-first project execution for repo-level goals
* Git-native dev workflow (branch, diff, commit)
* Tool orchestration system
* Vector memory (RAG)
* Runs fully local if desired
* Minimal, hackable architecture

---

## Quick start
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
uvicorn app:app --reload --port 8001
```

Then connect the React UI to `http://localhost:8001/v1/chat/completions`.
Open docs at `http://localhost:8001/docs`.

Defaults:
- Provider auto-detection order: OpenAI -> Anthropic -> Ollama
- Optional explicit model override: `MANTIS_MODEL`
- Vector memory path: `.mantis/chroma` (override with `MANTIS_CHROMA_DIR`)

Tool calls: the agent emits `TOOL: tool_name | input`.

Runtime toolset includes:
- Workspace awareness: `workspace.tree`, `workspace.read_file`, `workspace.search`, `workspace.snapshot`
- Code editing: `create_file`, `write_file`, `patch_file`, `delete_file`
- Validation: `run_tests` (auto-detects `pytest`, `npm test`, `make test`)
- Git tools: `git.status`, `git.create_branch`, `git.diff`, `git.checkout`, `git.log`, `git.commit`
- Utility: `python`, `http`

Safety controls:
- `MANTIS_DEV_MODE=true` enables planner-driven project loops.
- `MANTIS_ALLOW_FILE_WRITE=false` by default disables file mutation tools.
- `MANTIS_SANDBOX=true` restricts file writes to `./workspace/`.
- All successful file mutations are logged to `.mantis/changes/`.
- Resumable plans are persisted in `.mantis/plans/`.
- Task queue is persisted in `.mantis/queue.json`.
- Execution metrics are appended to `.mantis/metrics.jsonl`.
- Worker includes autonomous repo task discovery and enqueues goals without user prompts.

Try this to validate loop + tools:
```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:8001/v1/chat/completions \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"model":"mantis-local-agent","messages":[{"role":"user","content":"fetch https://example.com and summarize it"}]}'
```

## Install
```bash
git clone <repo>
cd mantis
cp .env.example .env
bash scripts/install.sh
python mantis.py chat
```

## Cloud Mode (No Ollama)
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
export OPENAI_API_KEY=your_key_here
python mantis.py api
```

## Local Mode (Ollama)
```bash
ollama serve
ollama pull qwen2.5:7b-instruct
python mantis.py worker
```

## Hybrid Mode
Mantis routes by model prefix:
- `gpt*` -> OpenAI
- `claude*` -> Anthropic
- anything else -> Ollama

You can run all providers together and select per-request with the `model` field.

## Edge Mode (Raspberry Pi / Low Power Devices)

Mantis supports running on ARM devices.

In Edge Mode:
- Memory uses keyword recall instead of embeddings
- No PyTorch / Transformers required
- LLM runs remotely via OpenAI-compatible API

Recommended architecture:
Raspberry Pi -> runs Mantis
Gaming PC -> runs llama.cpp server

---

## Why Mantis exists

Most AI products today are:

* APIs
* chat apps
* hosted platforms

Mantis is a **personal AI runtime**.

Software that sits between:

* you
* your tools
* your data
* your models

Goals:

* Bring Your Own LLM (OpenAI / Claude / Local)
* Avoid vendor lock-in
* Run locally and privately
* Learn how agent systems actually work
* Provide a clean reference architecture for builders

---

## Architecture

```mermaid
flowchart TB

User[User / Apps]

subgraph API Layer
API[OpenAI-Compatible API]
end

subgraph Mantis Runtime
Agent[Agent Runtime Loop]
Prompt[Prompt Builder]
Memory[Vector Memory]
Tools[Tool Router]
end

subgraph Model Providers
LLM[OPENAI • Claude • Local LLM]
end

subgraph Memory Layer
VectorDB[(Vector Database)]
end

subgraph Tools
Python[Python Executor]
Browser[Browser Automation]
HTTP[HTTP / APIs]
end

User --> API
API --> Agent

Agent --> Prompt
Agent --> Memory
Agent --> Tools

Prompt --> LLM
Memory --> VectorDB

Tools --> Python
Tools --> Browser
Tools --> HTTP

LLM --> Agent
Python --> Agent
Browser --> Agent
HTTP --> Agent
```

<p>Mantis is designed as a personal AI runtime.
The system sits between users, tools, data, and model providers, enabling autonomous task execution with full control over models and integrations.</p>

<a href='docs/diagrams/FULL_UML_Diagram.mermaid'>Full diagram</a>

---

## How it works

Every request triggers a short autonomous agent cycle.

1. **Request enters the API**
   Messages from UI, CLI, or integrations are received via an OpenAI-compatible endpoint.

2. **Context is assembled**
   The runtime gathers recent conversation and retrieves relevant long-term memories from the vector database.

3. **The agent decides the next action**
   The LLM chooses whether to:

   * reply to the user
   * call a tool
   * store new memory

4. **Tools execute real actions**
   Mantis can run code, fetch data, or automate tasks and feed results back into the loop.

5. **Response is returned**
   The loop ends when the agent produces a final answer.

This transforms a chat model into a persistent, tool-using personal AI runtime.

---

## Bring Your Own LLM

Mantis is model-agnostic.

Use whichever provider you prefer:

* OpenAI
* Anthropic Claude
* Ollama / Local GGUF models
* LM Studio
* Future providers

Your runtime. Your model. Your choice.

---

## Inspiration

Mantis is inspired by:

* OpenClaw
  [https://github.com/OpenClaw/OpenClaw](https://github.com/OpenClaw/OpenClaw)

* PicoClaw
  [https://github.com/sipeed/picoclaw](https://github.com/sipeed/picoclaw)

These projects helped shape the modern personal-AI runtime pattern.

---

## How Mantis differs

Mantis distills the core architecture down to its essentials.

Instead of a large feature-heavy platform, Mantis focuses on the smallest set of components required to build a personal AI runtime.

### What we kept

From OpenClaw:

* Autonomous agent loop
* Local-first workflow
* Tool orchestration

From PicoClaw:

* OpenAI-compatible API
* Modular tool mindset
* Gateway-friendly architecture

### What we simplified

Mantis prioritizes:

* clarity
* minimalism
* hackability
* learnability

It is a **reference implementation**, not a feature race.

---

## Project status

Currently in the **design and architecture phase**.

### Phase 1 — MVP

* OpenAI-compatible API
* Local LLM integration
* Agent loop
* Basic tools
* Vector memory

### Phase 2

* Browser automation
* Task scheduling
* Background agents

### Phase 3

* Plugin / skill system
* Multi-agent workflows
* Deployment options

---

## Planned modules

| Module | Responsibility                  |
| ------ | ------------------------------- |
| API    | OpenAI-compatible interface     |
| Agent  | Autonomous reasoning loop       |
| Tools  | Code execution and integrations |
| Memory | Vector storage and retrieval    |

---

## Contributing

Mantis is designed to be a learning-friendly open-source project.

Contributions welcome:

* architecture ideas
* documentation
* tooling
* early implementation

---

## License

MIT License

Commit message:

log: updated the readme to explain what the changes do. So far this version seems to

README.md, after:

# Mantis — Personal AI Runtime

<p align="center">
  <img src="docs/assets/mantis-logo.png" alt="Mantis Logo" width="420"/>
</p>

<p align="center">
  <strong>AUTOMATE • THINK • EXECUTE</strong>
</p>

---

**Mantis** is a minimal, extensible personal AI runtime for autonomous task execution using **OpenAI, Claude, or local LLMs** with vector memory and tool orchestration.

Bring your own model. Run your own agent. Own your AI stack.

---

## Features

* OpenAI-compatible API
* Works with **OpenAI, Claude, or Local LLMs**
* Autonomous agent loop
* Planner-first project execution for repo-level goals
* Git-native dev workflow (branch, diff, commit)
* Tool orchestration system
* Vector memory (RAG)
* Runs fully local if desired
* Minimal, hackable architecture

---

## Quick start
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
uvicorn app:app --reload --port 8001
```

Then connect the React UI to `http://localhost:8001/v1/chat/completions`.
Open docs at `http://localhost:8001/docs`.

Defaults:
- Provider auto-detection order: OpenAI -> Anthropic -> Ollama
- Optional explicit model override: `MANTIS_MODEL`
- Vector memory path: `.mantis/chroma` (override with `MANTIS_CHROMA_DIR`)

Tool calls: the agent emits `TOOL: tool_name | input`.

Runtime toolset includes:
- Workspace awareness: `workspace.tree`, `workspace.read_file`, `workspace.search`, `workspace.snapshot`
- Code editing: `create_file`, `write_file`, `patch_file`, `delete_file`
- Validation: `run_tests` (auto-detects `pytest`, `npm test`, `make test`)
- Git tools: `git.status`, `git.create_branch`, `git.diff`, `git.checkout`, `git.log`, `git.commit`
- Utility: `python`, `http`

Safety controls:
- `MANTIS_DEV_MODE=true` enables planner-driven project loops.
- `MANTIS_ALLOW_FILE_WRITE=false` by default disables file mutation tools.
- `MANTIS_SANDBOX=true` restricts file writes to `./workspace/`.
- All successful file mutations are logged to `.mantis/changes/`.
- Resumable plans are persisted in `.mantis/plans/`.
- Task queue is persisted in `.mantis/queue.json`.
- Execution metrics are appended to `.mantis/metrics.jsonl`.
- Worker includes autonomous repo task discovery and enqueues goals without user prompts.

Try this to validate loop + tools:
```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:8001/v1/chat/completions \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"model":"mantis-local-agent","messages":[{"role":"user","content":"fetch https://example.com and summarize it"}]}'
```

## Install
```bash
git clone <repo>
cd mantis
cp .env.example .env
bash scripts/install.sh
python mantis.py chat
```

## Cloud Mode (No Ollama)
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
export OPENAI_API_KEY=your_key_here
python mantis.py api
```

## Local Mode (Ollama)
```bash
ollama serve
ollama pull qwen2.5:7b-instruct
python mantis.py worker
```

## Hybrid Mode
Mantis routes by model prefix:
- `gpt*` -> OpenAI
- `claude*` -> Anthropic
- anything else -> Ollama

You can run all providers together and select per-request with the `model` field.

## Edge Mode (Raspberry Pi / Low Power Devices)

Mantis supports running on ARM devices.

In Edge Mode:
- Memory uses keyword recall instead of embeddings
- No PyTorch / Transformers required
- LLM runs remotely via OpenAI-compatible API

Recommended architecture:
Raspberry Pi -> runs Mantis
Gaming PC -> runs llama.cpp server

### What we changed for Raspberry Pi

The Pi crash (`Illegal instruction`) came from x86-oriented ML dependencies pulled by embedding libraries.
To make Mantis ARM-safe, we changed the runtime to avoid those dependencies:

- Replaced embedding-based memory with lightweight keyword recall in `agent/memory.py`
- Removed `sentence-transformers` from `requirements.txt` and installer flow
- Kept memory persistence through Chroma, using a placeholder embedding at write time
- Loaded `.env` at startup in `mantis.py` so CLI chat mode can read `MANTIS_BASE_URL` before provider detection

### How it works on Pi now

1. Raspberry Pi runs the Mantis agent loop and tools.
2. Mantis reads `MANTIS_BASE_URL` from `.env` and detects your OpenAI-compatible endpoint.
3. All LLM inference is sent to your remote server (for example, llama.cpp on a gaming PC).
4. Memory retrieval on Pi uses keyword matching instead of local embedding models.

Result: no PyTorch download path, no x86 AVX dependency, and stable startup on ARM devices.

### Quick Pi startup

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
export MANTIS_BASE_URL=http://<gaming-pc-ip>:<port>/v1
python3 mantis.py chat
```

---

## Why Mantis exists

Most AI products today are:

* APIs
* chat apps
* hosted platforms

Mantis is a **personal AI runtime**.

Software that sits between:

* you
* your tools
* your data
* your models

Goals:

* Bring Your Own LLM (OpenAI / Claude / Local)
* Avoid vendor lock-in
* Run locally and privately
* Learn how agent systems actually work
* Provide a clean reference architecture for builders

---

## Architecture

```mermaid
flowchart TB

User[User / Apps]

subgraph API Layer
API[OpenAI-Compatible API]
end

subgraph Mantis Runtime
Agent[Agent Runtime Loop]
Prompt[Prompt Builder]
Memory[Vector Memory]
Tools[Tool Router]
end

subgraph Model Providers
LLM[OPENAI • Claude • Local LLM]
end

subgraph Memory Layer
VectorDB[(Vector Database)]
end

subgraph Tools
Python[Python Executor]
Browser[Browser Automation]
HTTP[HTTP / APIs]
end

User --> API
API --> Agent

Agent --> Prompt
Agent --> Memory
Agent --> Tools

Prompt --> LLM
Memory --> VectorDB

Tools --> Python
Tools --> Browser
Tools --> HTTP

LLM --> Agent
Python --> Agent
Browser --> Agent
HTTP --> Agent
```

<p>Mantis is designed as a personal AI runtime.
The system sits between users, tools, data, and model providers, enabling autonomous task execution with full control over models and integrations.</p>

<a href='docs/diagrams/FULL_UML_Diagram.mermaid'>Full diagram</a>

---

## How it works

Every request triggers a short autonomous agent cycle.

1. **Request enters the API**
   Messages from UI, CLI, or integrations are received via an OpenAI-compatible endpoint.

2. **Context is assembled**
   The runtime gathers recent conversation and retrieves relevant long-term memories from the vector database.

3. **The agent decides the next action**
   The LLM chooses whether to:

   * reply to the user
   * call a tool
   * store new memory

4. **Tools execute real actions**
   Mantis can run code, fetch data, or automate tasks and feed results back into the loop.

5. **Response is returned**
   The loop ends when the agent produces a final answer.

This transforms a chat model into a persistent, tool-using personal AI runtime.

---

## Bring Your Own LLM

Mantis is model-agnostic.

Use whichever provider you prefer:

* OpenAI
* Anthropic Claude
* Ollama / Local GGUF models
* LM Studio
* Future providers

Your runtime. Your model. Your choice.

---

## Inspiration

Mantis is inspired by:

* OpenClaw
  [https://github.com/OpenClaw/OpenClaw](https://github.com/OpenClaw/OpenClaw)

* PicoClaw
  [https://github.com/sipeed/picoclaw](https://github.com/sipeed/picoclaw)

These projects helped shape the modern personal-AI runtime pattern.

---

## How Mantis differs

Mantis distills the core architecture down to its essentials.

Instead of a large feature-heavy platform, Mantis focuses on the smallest set of components required to build a personal AI runtime.

### What we kept

From OpenClaw:

* Autonomous agent loop
* Local-first workflow
* Tool orchestration

From PicoClaw:

* OpenAI-compatible API
* Modular tool mindset
* Gateway-friendly architecture

### What we simplified

Mantis prioritizes:

* clarity
* minimalism
* hackability
* learnability

It is a **reference implementation**, not a feature race.

---

## Project status

Currently in the **design and architecture phase**.

### Phase 1 — MVP

* OpenAI-compatible API
* Local LLM integration
* Agent loop
* Basic tools
* Vector memory

### Phase 2

* Browser automation
* Task scheduling
* Background agents

### Phase 3

* Plugin / skill system
* Multi-agent workflows
* Deployment options

---

## Planned modules

| Module | Responsibility                  |
| ------ | ------------------------------- |
| API    | OpenAI-compatible interface     |
| Agent  | Autonomous reasoning loop       |
| Tools  | Code execution and integrations |
| Memory | Vector storage and retrieval    |

---

## Contributing

Mantis is designed to be a learning-friendly open-source project.

Contributions welcome:

* architecture ideas
* documentation
* tooling
* early implementation

---

## License

MIT License
